Roles of Expert Systems : Knowledge Acquisition
Roles of Expert Systems: Knowledge Acquisition
1. What is Knowledge Acquisition?

Knowledge Acquisition is the process of collecting, extracting, organizing, and transferring knowledge from experts and other sources into a form that an expert system can use.

In simple words:

Knowledge Acquisition = Getting expert knowledge and putting it into the Knowledge Base of an Expert System.

The acquired knowledge may include:

Facts
Rules
Procedures
Heuristics
Relationships
Problem-solving strategies
Experiences of human experts
Example

Suppose we are developing a medical diagnosis expert system.

A doctor may provide knowledge such as:

If the patient has fever and cough, then the patient may have flu.
If the patient has high fever and skin rash, then the patient may have measles.

This knowledge is collected from the doctor and represented as rules in the expert system.

2. Role of an Expert System in Knowledge Acquisition

Knowledge acquisition is one of the important roles involved in developing and maintaining an expert system.

The expert system development process can be viewed as:

Human Expert → Knowledge Acquisition → Knowledge Representation → Knowledge Base → Inference Engine → Solution

The Knowledge Acquisition Module helps capture knowledge from experts and convert it into machine-processable knowledge.

3. Sources of Knowledge

Knowledge can be acquired from several sources.

1. Human Experts

The primary source is often a domain expert.

Examples:

Doctor → Medical diagnosis
Engineer → Equipment troubleshooting
Financial analyst → Investment decisions
Lawyer → Legal reasoning
2. Books and Documents

Knowledge can be extracted from:

Textbooks
Manuals
Research papers
Technical documents
Regulations
3. Databases

Existing databases can provide:

Historical records
Measurements
Cases
Transactions
4. Observations

Knowledge can be obtained by observing experts while they solve real problems.

5. Existing Software and Knowledge Bases

Knowledge may also be extracted from existing systems.

4. Knowledge Acquisition Process

A typical knowledge acquisition process consists of the following steps:

Step 1: Identify the Knowledge

Determine what knowledge is required to solve the problem.

Example:

For a medical system, identify:

Symptoms
Diseases
Diagnostic rules
Treatment guidelines
Step 2: Identify the Knowledge Source

Determine where the knowledge will come from.

For example:

Doctor
Medical books
Patient records
Research papers
Step 3: Elicit the Knowledge

Knowledge elicitation means extracting knowledge from the source.

Common methods include:

Interviews
Questionnaires
Observation
Case analysis
Brainstorming
Step 4: Organize the Knowledge

The acquired knowledge is structured into:

Facts
Rules
Concepts
Relationships
Procedures
Step 5: Represent the Knowledge

The knowledge is converted into a representation suitable for the expert system.

For example:

IF fever AND cough
THEN flu

Step 6: Validate the Knowledge

The acquired knowledge is checked with domain experts to ensure that it is:

Correct
Complete
Consistent
Relevant
Step 7: Store in Knowledge Base

After validation, the knowledge is stored in the Knowledge Base.

5. Knowledge Acquisition Techniques
A. Interview

The knowledge engineer asks questions to the domain expert.

Example:

"What symptoms indicate pneumonia?"

The expert provides the required knowledge.

Advantage: Detailed information can be obtained.

Limitation: Experts may find it difficult to explain their reasoning.

B. Observation

The knowledge engineer observes how an expert performs a task.

Example:

Observing a technician diagnosing a machine failure.

This is useful for acquiring procedural knowledge.

C. Questionnaire

A set of predefined questions is given to the expert.

Advantage: Easy to organize and compare answers.

Limitation: May not capture complex reasoning.

D. Case Analysis

Previous problem-solving cases are studied.

For example:

Patient symptoms → Diagnosis → Treatment

Repeated cases can reveal useful rules.

E. Automatic Knowledge Acquisition

Knowledge can sometimes be extracted automatically from:

Databases
Machine-learning models
Text
Historical cases

This reduces dependence on manual knowledge extraction.

6. Knowledge Engineer

A knowledge engineer plays a major role in knowledge acquisition.

The knowledge engineer acts as a bridge between the domain expert and the computer system.

Knowledge Engineer's Responsibilities
Identify knowledge sources.
Interview domain experts.
Extract useful knowledge.
Organize the knowledge.
Select suitable representation techniques.
Encode knowledge into the knowledge base.
Validate the knowledge.
Update and maintain the knowledge base.
Relationship

Domain Expert
↓
Provides expertise
↓
Knowledge Engineer
↓
Acquires and represents knowledge
↓
Knowledge Base
↓
Used by
↓
Inference Engine

7. Problems in Knowledge Acquisition

Knowledge acquisition is often considered one of the most difficult and time-consuming parts of developing an expert system.

1. Knowledge Acquisition Bottleneck

Experts possess a large amount of knowledge, but extracting all of it can be difficult.

This problem is called the knowledge acquisition bottleneck.

2. Tacit Knowledge

Experts often use experience or intuition that they cannot easily explain.

For example:

An experienced mechanic may immediately recognize an engine problem from its sound, but may not be able to clearly state the exact rule used.

3. Incomplete Knowledge

The expert may not know all possible situations.

4. Inconsistent Knowledge

Different experts may provide different solutions to the same problem.

5. Changing Knowledge

Knowledge in some domains changes frequently.

For example:

Medical knowledge
Laws
Technology
Financial regulations

Therefore, the knowledge base must be continuously updated.

8. Example: Car Troubleshooting Expert System

Suppose we want to build an expert system for diagnosing car problems.

Knowledge acquisition from mechanic

The mechanic provides:

Observation	Expert Knowledge
Engine does not start	Check battery
Battery is weak	Check battery terminals
Battery is normal but engine does not start	Check fuel system
Engine overheats	Check coolant

This can be converted into rules:

IF engine_does_not_start AND battery_is_weak
THEN check_battery_terminals

IF engine_does_not_start AND battery_is_normal
THEN check_fuel_system

IF engine_overheats
THEN check_coolant

These rules are then stored in the Knowledge Base.

9. Importance of Knowledge Acquisition

Knowledge acquisition is important because it:

Captures expertise from human experts.
Builds the knowledge base.
Converts human knowledge into machine-readable form.
Preserves expert knowledge.
Helps expert systems make intelligent decisions.
Allows knowledge to be updated when the domain changes.
Reduces dependence on a single human expert.
Exam Definition

Knowledge Acquisition is the process of collecting, extracting, organizing, validating, and representing knowledge from human experts and other sources for storage in the knowledge base of an expert system.

Short Exam Answer

Role of Expert Systems – Knowledge Acquisition:

Knowledge acquisition is the process of obtaining domain-specific knowledge from experts, documents, databases, observations, and other sources. A knowledge engineer collects and organizes this knowledge and represents it as facts, rules, relationships, and heuristics. The acquired knowledge is validated and stored in the knowledge base, where it can be used by the inference engine to solve problems.